hey I just had some questions about
teaching english as the second language
in asia so for me teaching English as a
second language has never been my career
it's never been the main thing I was
interested in but before I ever left for
Asia I did get a certificate in teaching
ESL in Canada obviously I also have a
bachelor's degree mmm
so I'm a fully qualified English teacher
and I anticipated the teach English as a
second language would be something I did
in between other jobs or if I found a
good situation it'd be something I could
do while learning another language so at
that time of course actually I guess at
that time really my heart was set on
Cambodia rather than Laos um various
obstacles got in the way between me and
living in Cambodia but eventually I did
live in Cambodia I lived in Cambodia
Thailand Laos Taiwan a little a little
bit in Sri Lanka Myanmar is also a big
part of my life although I've never
lived in Myanmar and now I'm living in
Yunnan China
I lived here previously 2007-2008 um
look the very end of my time living in
Cambodia earlier I had been doing
humanitarian research so research linked
to the humanitarian sector which is
tremendously important work in a lot of
ways the research is much more crucial
than the hands-on element if you mention
work like the hands-on element may be
handing out sacks of rice the hands out
the hands-on element maybe just donating
money to a hospital but then the
research is going to be people finding
out what happened to that money did it
actually improve the hospital or did it
get you know purloined or misallocated
misfit was was the intervention
effective and even with sacks of rice
did those sacks of rice end up in the
hands of poor people or did they get
taken away by an armed militia who then
sold it for a profit
what actually happened the rice even in
the simplest forms of humanitarian
intervention there's a really important
role for research in guiding that
intervention correcting errors and
ultimately in delivering the services
that you as a charity are trying to
provide so doing that kind of
work up to a point and I quit on point
of moral principle because of corruption
corruption and incompetence but I quit
for ethical reasons that job and then
while we were figuring out what we were
gonna do next we being me and my wife
who is now my ex-wife I taught English
in a university there in film fan and
that job I mean the funny thing about
teaching English it really is like
babysitting children in a sense in that
the core of the job is rewarding and
meaningful and wonderful and nice you
know and for that reason people will
horribly under pay you and horribly
exploit you and you deal with these
horribly corrupt agencies and schools
and institutions all the time you know
now why do I compare it to babysitting
you know babysitting is underpaid
nannying work we lose afford every as we
said they were saying nannying and said
babysitting you know being a nanny is
underpaid and that's been studied you
know one of the reasons is it's a nice
job
people find it you know morally
rewarding they take the people who
really choose to be nannies and stay
with the job they have other motivations
yes maybe they they maybe it's actually
just caring for the child that's
rewarding but you know in Canada you
know Filipina nannies they get permanent
residency and then they can get Canadian
citizenship also so they have careerist
aspirations and it may also be the kind
of person from spending time with a
child caring for a child is tremendous a
warning at the core of that job even in
Cambodia as horrible and terrible place
as Cambodia was to live it's terrible
place as it was to be vegan
it's terrible a place as it was to try
to earn a living and that the universe
isn't ly terrible I mean the core of
that job the actual educational role of
helping people is from he tremendously
rewarding even in those circumstances
true in some ways the worst the worst of
circumstances and you know for the most
part I had the worst of students my
students were terrible in Cambodia it's
not the only place I've taught I've
taught English another another
um I would walk every day in the pouring
rain because it was the rainy season
torrential tropical rain from the
southwest corner of the city to the
northwest corner of the city so I'm
sorry I have not got a map here but that
was many kilometres so I don't know
let's say it was three kilometers in
each direction I really forget but that
was a long long walk they were from the
one extreme edge of the city to the
other and there are several university
campuses there in the northwest corner
of the Phnom Penh and I would walk on
the main sort of highway there than the
most important road because when it was
raining like that that was the only
Street that wasn't flooded any of the
smaller streets you'd have rain up to
your ankles or up to your knees or they
would just be impossible to walk on so I
would very carefully navigate my way
with my umbrella up with the torrential
tropical pouring rain every step of the
way
and then you may ask why didn't I take a
taxi my wage was so low that if I took a
taxi that was like 60% of my wage so the
money I earned that day 60% of it would
have been spent on going to and from my
place of employment Cambodia like many
post-war societies bouncing back from
devastation
had gone through a period of very rapid
inflation so the value of the money in
terms of purchasing power had declined
that is normal in those historical and
economic circumstances and I sat down
with my boss at one point and you know I
have a very good education in economics
but I appealed to real-world examples I
said to him when was the last time at
this school you increased the rate of
pay per hour and he very proudly said
never we paid the same amount since the
school's first open and I said oh I said
do you remember ten years ago how much a
bottle of beer cost here in Cambodia
here infant on pan and he did remember
he said yes I remember ten years ago he
said I remember ten years ago when I
just moved to the city a bottle of beer
was only 25 cents or 50 cents some
thought he said and now you know you're
lucky to get a bottle of beer for three
dollars there are four dollars and five
dollars it was
something like this this is from memory
but it really was that kind of dramatic
change in the economy and again many
third-world post-war countries going
through a period of rapid
industrialization that is what happens
to their currency beer used to be 25
cents and now beer is $4 a bottle or
some of that especially and this is in
the capital city if you're out in the
remote countryside if you're out in a
small town with no electricity maybe
that's another story but the whole
country bounce back and prices change
and the economy was transformed the
whole country was transformed very very
rapidly so that's what happened and I
said to him you're paying the same
amount of money to your teachers but the
cost of rent for an apartment has gone
up exponentially it used to be that
rents in phenom pen was $10 a month now
you're lucky to pay $300 a month you
could be paying five and dollars a month
US dollars you know bottle of beer used
to be 25 cents as you said it's $5 with
him I just used some specific examples
so that things he would remember
I don't drink the round drink any
alcohol there's just useful examples and
I presented to him a completely coherent
argument that you know ten years earlier
really more like 20 years earlier that
University was paying a very livable a
living wage was paying a good wage she
was professors but today it was a
starvation wage today it was a wage that
nobody could possibly live on and as I
said I couldn't afford to take a taxi to
work I had to walk in the pouring
tropical rain and the rain was the best
time to go to work because the Sun was
worse in that heat in that climate the
days when it wasn't raining that was
much worse I preferred walking in the
torrential rain because walking in the
Sun you'd sweat through all your clothes
and I used the same umbrella
you know you'd use an umbrella to keep
the Sun off you but it was really much
more miserable to walk in the in the Sun
than it was in the rain that's that
Cambodian climate it'll kill you the
only people who find the Cambodian
climate Pleasant or the Nigerian
immigrants there were guys there from
Nigeria who were comfortable in that
heat
but the Cambodians themselves are not
very comfortable and we talked to
Chinese people people from anywhere else
of course the Western world it's a
punishingly hot climate especially now
global warming has made it worse in case
you hadn't heard um
worse and worse and worse so in that
context and look I'm not really the
human context of it worse cambodia has a
culture that combines the worst elements
of Buddhism the worst elements of French
colonialism the worst elements of
communism and the worst elements of
fascism when I say fascism I really mean
it in the sense of feudalism the feudal
heritage but you know I do mean fascism
I mean feudalism as it has been
reimagined and remembered in a modern
authoritarian context which is an
important part of fascism Cambodians or
Aragon
if you teach English as a second
language in Cambodian your boss treats
you like [ __ ] the other teachers the
Cambodian born teachers treat you like
[ __ ] at any excuse and your students
treat you like [ __ ] out of sheer
arrogance and I am the very rare
personality type that finds that
hilarious and it doesn't emotionally
impact me at all but nowhere else in the
world without you have a student like in
Korea or in Japan you wouldn't have a
student coming into class like a level
one English student someone who really
can't speak English worth a damn if
someone whose really needs your help and
telling you how to teach the class but
in Cambodia that's routine the students
come in and on their second day of class
they tell you that you're doing it all
wrong there was one little girl sorry I
mean she was the same age so whatever
she was probably 19 years old but she
was really really small
that's why I remembered her as a little
girl which was a very very small scrawny
19 year old girl and I remember she came
in and she shone with total confidence
and total arrogance that what I was
doing was completely wrong and every day
what we should do in class is do
crossword puzzles so no my crossword
puzzle is it's a piece of paper with a
bunch of lines and they fill in and the
clap that class was supposed to be a
conversation class supposed to be
speaking and listening comprehension so
I wasn't supposed to be teaching writing
at all I wasn't supposed to doing
writing or you know essay writing or
that kind of testing that was their one
chance to spend time face-to-face with a
native speaker of English their other
teachers were Cambodians who spoke good
English and they would walk them through
they would do more of those types of
exercises writing exercises you know
filling out tests on pieces of paper but
the whole point what they were paying
for with me as part of that program it
was a comprehensive program was that was
there time to hear my voice speak back
to me to have that it was their only
chance to try to get you know speaking
and listening comprehension right with
it with a foreigner with someone who
speaks English as their first language I
did actually teach grammar also but it
was not grammar for SI right not in that
class anomie a lot of other people
would've found the and I've never
stopped smiling and I was laughing a
little bit as this young woman was
telling me that was terrible teacher
it's wrong hey Jill you know you don't
that's a really interesting idea but you
know and she thought that's really she
knew every class was come in and do
crossword puzzles and hand them in and I
should correct them and then hand them
back I said you know if you do crossword
puzzles you never practice speaking in a
whole sentence or a whole paragraph you
just learn words so what I'm trying to
do in this class is get you to speak in
a whole sentence in a whole paragraph
which of course for them is really the
challenge it's not that hard for a
Cambodian to memorize a word in
isolation learn how to use it learn how
to speak with confidence and proper or
parentheses but
you know in in many of these cultures
definitely also in Hong Kong definitely
also in Taiwan but in Cambodia most of
all they regard the English teacher as
lower than a babysitter as lower than a
nanny even if you're teaching in
university you're treated with real
contempt and of course the pay the low
weights of pay respect reflect that
you're put in a position that most
people if I denigrating and humiliating
and off on daily basis and there's the
rain and all these other things and just
the poverty because once you accept that
job if that's your only income you you
are living in poverty as a teacher there
in Cambodia
I'll never forget there was one American
guy and the first day I met him wasn't
my first day of work but that that
university can wait but on the first day
I met him he said to me with with real
passion convictions well she said this
whole university is a joke this whole
university is a scam and you know the
pay is terrible and you know the
education is terrible and you know and I
replied to him looking him straight in
the eye I wasn't upset by that I said to
him if that's true why do you work here
anyone can leave and that guy's been
working there for years and he was still
working there he kept working there
after I left and he looked down and you
know before he was so confident and
brash and with the saddest expression
possible on his face he said I like to
be able to pay my electricity bills I
assumed he was another one of these
shipwrecked white men a white man who
went to Cambodia with no money and
married a Cambodian woman and settled
down and he probably lives with his
wife's family so he probably doesn't pay
rents because that job does not give you
enough money teaching English that
university did not give you enough money
to pay rent in phenomena didn't but if
you live with your wife's parents in one
wooden house if you all live together
and share our share a bathroom then
you're not paying any rent so then your
salary goes further and as he said you
get to pay the electricity bills
and probably when you go home probably
your wife's parents also are very
arrogant and also treat you in that
insulting and denigrating way as part of
their culture um
but the core of the job is still so
rewarding teaching English is still
wonderful and yes some people put up
with it for bad reasons some people do
have the wrong intentions there are guys
out here teach English just because they
sleep with prostitutes or just because
they're trapped like that guy was
trapped or just because they're drug
addicts there are a lot of alcoholics a
lot of drug addicts in the English
teachings for sure there are terrible
people but I mean the good people to be
blunt the people of more reading the
reason why they stay in the game is that
it is really wonderful to sit down with
somebody and work with them and help
them and over three months to see their
ability in the language improve and
English as a language it's not just a
language if you grew up only being able
to read newspapers in Cambodian and now
suddenly you can read newspapers or you
can read news on the internet in English
changes your life suddenly you have
questions about history and politics and
you have a totally different perspective
a totally different so even health you
know whether we're talking about
veganism or not before you just had
these weird stories your grandmother
told you about what was healthy and what
wasn't and now your English is
progressing and you can start to read
real science about human health in
English because it's not available in
Cambodian you can't get that information
in Cambodia
you know it's changing their lives in a
way that you get to see day by day and
yes a lot of the students are arrogant
the majority of them can be by far but
not all of them you know not all of them
are so terrible and some of the students
have you know career aspirations that
you sympathize with and you want to
support them and you want to see them
grow you want to see them comfort their
goals there's a core to what the job is
and that really positive supportive
nurturing relationship between teacher
and student that I as a character in
terms of my humanitarian instincts that
I love and people a certain type of
person would be willing to do that job
for free even in the torrential rain
even in the Sun even with your boss
disrespecting you and lying to you
getting lied to by buzzing and sadly
that's why the whole industry is so
exploitive it's an industry predicated
on exploiting the ignorance and
gullibility of the students and the good
intentions and fundamentally parental
nurturing instincts of the people who
would become teachers